---
title: "Les passages peuvent-ils être partagés? Comment la co-utilisation humaine
desstructures de passages souterrain affecte l’utilisation par la faune? /
Can passages be shared by humans and wildlife? How human co-use of
underpasses affects the tendency of mammals to cross beneath a high traffic
highway."
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/ACFAS
venue: "85e Congrès de l'ACFAS"
date: 2017-05-12
location: "Montreal, QC"
---

[More information here](https://www.acfas.ca/evenements/congres/programme/85/200/204/c)

Daniella LoScerbo 1 , Caroline Daguet 2 , Jochen A.G. Jaeger 3
1 Université Concordia, Montréal, QC, Département de biologie
2 Corridor appalachien, Eastman, QC
3 Université Concordia, Montréal, QC, Département de géographie, urbanisme et
environnement

While the ability to move between habitats is critical for the viability of animal
populations, the spread of urbanization is continuously adding barriers within the natural
landscape; the most pervasive of which is the construction of roads and highways. The
ideal situation of using existing structures, such as train and road underpasses and
water culverts for wildlife cannot be assumed for all animal species, as it may also be
that human use of structures is a deterrent for specific wildlife. Employing 36 wildlife
cameras at 9 underpasses below Highway 10 East, our research provides 9 months of
continuous, standardized, and non-invasive observation of human and mammal use, in
order to (1) estimate the permeability of the road for medium and large mammals and
(2) to determine the effect of human use of underpasses on the use by medium and
large mammals. Over a maximum period of 315 continuous observation days at each of
9 underpasses, a total of 1450 individuals from 10 medium to large mammalian species
were observed: white-tailed deer, coyote, bobcat, black bear, red fox, fisher, raccoon,
mink, otter, and marmot. All three types of underpasses monitored, train, road, and
culvert, were used by mammals to cross below Highway 10. The effect of human use
varied depending on structure type and by species of mammal. Recommendations to
increase the use of all underpasses by wildlife include addition of a dry pathway through
all culverts, highway fencing along mortality hotspots, and whenever possible, dedicated
wildlife under/overpasses to increase the permeability of the highway to large mammals.
